#### Power may be expressed in several different ways, and it might be worthwhile sharing more than one of them with your students, as one definition may “click” with a student where another does not. Here are a few different ways to describe what power is:

* Power is the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when in fact it is false.
* Power is the probability of making a correct decision (to reject the null hypothesis) when the null hypothesis is false.
* Power is the probability that a test of significance will pick up on an effect that is present.
* Power is the probability that a test of significance will detect a deviation from the null hypothesis, should such a deviation exist.
* Power is the probability of avoiding a Type II error.
> To help students better grasp the concept, I continually restate what power means with different language each time. 
#### For example, if we are doing a test of significance at level α = 0.1, I might say, “That’s a pretty big alpha level. This test is ready to reject the null at the drop of a hat. Is this a very powerful test?” (Yes, it is. Or at least, it’s more powerful than it would be with a smaller alpha value.) Another example: If a student says that the consequences of a Type II error are very severe, then I may follow up with “So you really want to avoid Type II errors, huh? What does that say about what we require of our test of significance?” (We want a very powerful test.)
# What Affects Power?
> There are four things that primarily affect the power of a test of significance. They are:
* The significance level α of the test. If all other things are held constant, then as α increases, so does the power of the test. This is because a larger α means a larger rejection region for the test and thus a greater probability of rejecting the null hypothesis. That translates to a more powerful test. The price of this increased power is that as α goes up, so does the probability of a Type I error should the null hypothesis in fact be true.
* The sample size n. As n increases, so does the power of the significance test. This is because a larger sample size narrows the distribution of the test statistic. The hypothesized distribution of the test statistic and the true distribution of the test statistic (should the null hypothesis in fact be false) become more distinct from one another as they become narrower, so it becomes easier to tell whether the observed statistic comes from one distribution or the other. The price paid for this increase in power is the higher cost in time and resources required for collecting more data. There is usually a sort of “point of diminishing returns” up to which it is worth the cost of the data to gain more power, but beyond which the extra power is not worth the price.
* The inherent variability in the measured response variable. As the variability increases, the power of the test of significance decreases. One way to think of this is that a test of significance is like trying to detect the presence of a “signal,” such as the effect of a treatment, and the inherent variability in the response variable is “noise” that will drown out the signal if it is too great. Researchers can’t completely control the variability in the response variable, but they can sometimes reduce it through especially careful data collection and conscientiously uniform handling of experimental units or subjects. The design of a study may also reduce unexplained variability, and one primary reason for choosing such a design is that it allows for increased power without necessarily having exorbitantly costly sample sizes. For example, a matched-pairs design usually reduces unexplained variability by “subtracting out” some of the variability that individual subjects bring to a study. Researchers may do a preliminary study before conducting a full-blown study intended for publication. There are several reasons for this, but one of the more important ones is so researchers can assess the inherent variability within the populations they are studying. An estimate of that variability allows them to determine the sample size they will require for a future test having a desired power. A test lacking statistical power could easily result in a costly study that produces no significant findings.
* The difference between the hypothesized value of a parameter and its true value. This is sometimes called the “magnitude of the effect” in the case when the parameter of interest is the difference between parameter values (say, means) for two treatment groups. The larger the effect, the more powerful the test is. This is because when the effect is large, the true distribution of the test statistic is far from its hypothesized distribution, so the two distributions are distinct, and it’s easy to tell which one an observation came from. The intuitive idea is simply that it’s easier to detect a large effect than a small one. This principle has two consequences that students should understand, and that are essentially two sides of the same coin. On the one hand, it’s important to understand that a subtle but important effect (say, a modest increase in the life-saving ability of a hypertension treatment) may be demonstrable but could require a powerful test with a large sample size to produce statistical significance. On the other hand, a small, unimportant effect may be demonstrated with a high degree of statistical significance if the sample size is large enough. Because of this, too much power can almost be a bad thing, at least so long as many people continue to misunderstand the meaning of statistical significance. For your students to appreciate this aspect of power, they must understand that statistical significance is a measure of the strength of evidence of the presence of an effect. It is not a measure of the magnitude of the effect. For that, statisticians would construct a confidence interval.
